# Prediction-of-eGFR-Decline-in-ADPDK

During this project, I compare machine learning models in predicting kidney function decline (eGFR decline) in a longitudinal ADPKD cohort with 241 study subjects to enabled individualized treatment for ADPKD through understanding personalized dynamic changes in ADPKD disease progression and management with ML model

Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most common single-gene kidney disease and is considered to be the main cause of kidney failure. This disease is evaluated by examining kidney function, which is generally expressed in terms of glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). The pathological progression of ADPKD is related to the genetic factors of PKD genotype, demographic information and clinical indicators. The typical renal function pattern of ADPKD patients is to remain in the normal range for a long time, and then deteriorate rapidly, so it is difficult to predict at an early stage. Most previous studies have focused on using linear models to identify risk factors. The CRISP study aims to longitudinally monitor the eGFR value and other factors of 242 early ADPKD patienta.

We plot the original data eGFR over years to see the trajectory for each patient and understanding the trajectory character. Also using principal component analysis to use a smaller number of variables to explain the variability of most predictions and simplifying the analysis without losing information. Based on observations in other dataset in another research and from data visualization trajectory, we can see the renal function decline trajectory follows a trend like sigmoid, so we fit the patient’s eGFR and their age a sigmoidal curve. And we evaluated multiple machine learning methods in predicting the c values which is a significant parameter in the sigmoidal model. Several predictors of health records, PKD genotype, and total kidney volume, were included or excluded in the models and evaluated for their effect in prediction accuracy, and important predictors were identified in their contribution to the prediction of eGFR and its decline.

The result is not having much difference when we use PCA or original variables, which indicates we are able to use a smaller number of variables to explain the variability of most predictions. Fitting on everyone and get c, b and p-values for c and b, the fitting of sigmoidal curve shows that 176 out of the 242 subjects (70%) in the CRISP dataset have a significant inflection point (p<0.05). Of them, 118 (67%) strongly fit the sigmoidal curve model (the proportion of eGFR trajectory variance explained for each patient exceeds 70%; R2>0.7). The R2 of machine learning models predicting c value were about 0.56 using visit 1 data. When remove outlier, the R2 was largest (0.67) for predicting c value of patients. Adding more years of historical data or health information slightly improved R2 by 10%. Including health data do not change much R2 of models and impact the prediction power.
